This is Spool 43 taken from Mr. Henry Sochami, 38 years old, tattoo number 109752 triangle, meaning Jewish, a tattoo of the camp of Auschwitz.
...He will speak Spanish, he can speak German but it's rather... slow, and we prefer to use the language he can speak most fluently.
[In Spanish] Er... Mr. Sochami, tell me where you were born, and what your nationality is.
I am Greek.
Yes?
[Unintelligible]
Right.
Right. And where were you born?
In Salonica.
Right.
We were later deported...
Er... I would like you to tell me where you were when the Germans arrived, er... in the city where you resided.
Before the arrival of the Germans, I was in Albany, acting as a Greek soldier.
So you were in the Greek Army. And who were you fighting against?
Against Italy.
All right. Greece joined forces with England and the United States...
The United States, yes.
So you were fighting against Italy. And, what happened?
I was eight months in combat.
In what force were you enlisted?
I was in class 19...
No, no. What force did you belong to? Infantry...
Oh, the name was [unintelligible] télégraphiqué.
Oh! You were in... [unintelligible]?
Yes.
And you know [unintelligible]?
No.
You don't?
I played the clairon.
Ah!
The bugle.
So, You were the... er... bugler in... er... a telegraphic station.
Yes. Télégraphiqué.
Right.
[Inintelegible]
So, could we say you are a musician?
Yes.
Er, what instruments do you play?
The bugle.
So you play the bugle.
Then. When the Germans declared the war against Greece.
Yes.
I was fighting in Albany against Italians.
Right.
Then, when my city... Salonica, was occupied by Germans, we fought in Athens, and all the places of the Old Greece.
Later, we were forced to surrender to the German forces, and Germans escorted us to our houses.
Right.
I went to my house and took my three children.
What was the name of the city?
It was Salonica.
Salonica. And were you with your wife?
Yes.
Your wife and three children. How old were they?
One was 13 years old, [unintelligible name] Sochami; the second one was 10 years old, [unintelligible name] Sochami; and the third one, Dora Sochami, was 3 years old.
Right.
Then, when the Germans arrived, they took all the Jews and sent us to a camp...
Yes. To Auschwitz?
No, no. Before that.
Right.
We were taken to a labor camp.
Those of us between 17 and 45 years of age.
Right.
They took us...
Men and women?
No, just men.
Right.
Our names were written down, and we were given some signs. We were called by position.
Shared.
Right.
And we had to work.
After working there, we were taken to... er... some railways... to guard them.
Aha.
After that, we were taken to a ghetto to sleep.
To sleep?
To sleep, in the train station.
Right.
In Greece.
We were locked in the ghetto and we remained there for eight days.
Right.
After those eight days, three thousand five hundred people were sent...
Men and women?
Men and women and children.
Right.
To the closed railway cars.
So. As you were saying, you worked only with men... So where were your wife and the girls?
When we left San Nico, it was the 15th of March, 1943.
Who were you with?
With my family.
Right.
Yes. We arrived in Auschwitz.
At Auschwitz?
We got to the station on March 21.
Right.
There, there was a selection... officails...
...German officials, separated children, women and old people to one place...
Right.
...from those who could work in another area.
Children, women and old people were placed in trucks and sent to Birkenau.
To Birkenau?
Birkenau.
Right.
Once there, they were sent to the gas chamber, directly... almost with no difficulties.
The following morning, none of them were alive.
Did this happen to your family?
Yes. To all my family: three children and my wife.
Oh.
We were then sent to Auschwitz. Once in Auschwitz, we were left in the bathrooms all night long.
Right.
We were washed, our clothes were taken away.
We were given prisoner’s clothes, and we were placed under quarantine for forty days.
What did you do while you were in quarantine?
During the quarantine period, we were taken outside to do some physical exercise...
Right.
And that was it. After the forty days had passed, some officers came to see us.
They selected all those men who were strong and working men, and sent them out of Auschwitz, to other labor camps.
Right.
I stayed in Auschwitz.
What happened to those who could not work?
Those who could not work were taken to a hospital... er... from the hospital, they were taken to Birkenau, to the crematorium.
Right.
And as for those of us who could work, we were sent to labor camps or commands nearby.
In the commands . . . we were left aside, beaten...
Right.
And our food was a piece of bread with a liter of water.
What command did you work in?
In the [unintelligible].
And what did you do there?
There, we practiced masonry.
What?
Masonry.
Oh, you cut stone blocks?
Yes. Stones... with civilians who worked with us.
Right.
There was a little interruption.
A month before the Russians' arrival, the camp was evacuated and we were sent to a camp in [unintelligible name].
In [unintelligible name], there were only forty Jews, and the rest of the prisoners were Christian.
Could you please speak a little bit slower?
Christians battered us because they could not stand the mere sight of us.
They would walk away from us, they would beat us, and they would even take our bread which was our only food.
From there, before the Russians came, we were taken to Buchenwald.
We were forced in cattle railcars and we were locked there for three days and three nights, with no food and nothing to drink. Nothing.
Do you remember what month it was?
Er... It was February of 1945.
February of 1945. All right.
We were taken to Buchenwald.
There were sixty five to seventy thousand people under the same roof, from all nationalities, French, Italians... all the nationalities in the world.
We were in a building for some time, and then there was a selection and all those who were strong enough were taken to camps all around Germany for forced labors.
I would always hid under beds, or anywhere to avoid being taken to labor camps.
Oh! So it was possible to hide sometimes, wasn’t it?
It was sometimes possible.
It was sometimes possible. Speak more slowly please.
From there, I was taken to a small camp. In that small camp, I was in a barrack hut with 1,200-1,300 people.
There were 7 or 8 people per square meter. At ten in the morning, we were given a liter of water and a piece of bread.
Three months later, Americans were approaching and every afternoon Jews were gathered to be taken away. Christians were not taken away, but Jews were.
I would hide anywhere, and I even lived among Christians and they did not know I was a Jew.
Did you carry anything that distinguished you as Jews?
In Auschwitz, we carried a sign as Jews, but when we were in Buchenwald we did not have anything.
OK.
There were no differences among us.
Right.
Jews that were taken away from this place, were killed down the road with submachine guns.
I was able to hid for three days under ground, in a barrack, together with many Russian Christians, who did not know I was a Jew.
They didn’t know you.
They didn’t know if I was a Jew. I always told them I was Greek and Christian.
Greek and Christian, I see.
Then, a couple of days before the Germans left, the Americans arrived. It was about four in the afternoon, in April; April 11, 1945.
Right.
When I saw the Russians coming out, because we had been hiding, I did not want to go out because I was scared.
Then I saw they were all kissing and embracing each other outside.
I looked and I saw everybody was dancing because the Americans were coming, so I went out.
I weighted only 38 kg because of the famine, and though I was falling down, I started singing and dancing.
Right.
Once the Americans arrived, we started eating and drinking well, and I was with the Americans for two months.
Where?
In Buchenwald.
Buchenwald, I see.
After two months, we were sent to Paris to be taken to Greece.
Right.
By plane.
[Unintelligible].
How many people were there on the plane?
Only 53 Greek.
Aha.
And 10 from Salonica.
We were taken to Paris, and the rest were sent to Greece.
And since I had served in the French Légion Étrangère from 1920 to 1925, in Morocco...
Oh. Right. Aha.
I had the chance of staying in France.
Aha.
And so I stayed like this for a year because I was really thin.
And now, I have started to work.
And who do you work for now?
For an American journal.
OK. And what are you planning to do in the future?
I don’t know . . . For the time being, I am working here, and as soon as I can find another job to earn my living.
Aha. But, are you planning to stay in France?
Yes.
And...
May be I will go to Palestine later.
Aha.
And... as soon as the situation improves.
Aha. And what do you do here for the journal? What are you doing now?
I work here in the [unintelligible], Where they receive heavy boxes. I carry them, I close envelopes... er...
So you do manual work.
Yes. Manual work.
Do you have family here?
Unfortunately, there were 27 members in my family: 3 brothers, one sister with their own families.
And they all ended up in crematories, and I am the only one left in my whole family.
Aha.
Out of 27, I am alone in the world.
And have you written to Greece?
Yes. I have written to Greece, but [unintelligible] told me that my brother’s oldest son is alive.
Pardon me.
My brother’s oldest son is still alive.
So, he is alive.
Yes.
Aha.
And one of my sister’s daughters... people say they saw her alive with other girls...
but she left with some Belgians, and I have no idea whether she is dead or alive...
I don't know where she is... I was told she was sent to Belgium.
Oh. Right. She went to Belgium but you are not sure.
Yes. I don’t know where [unintelligible].
Well, monsieur... Sochami. This has been an interesting conversation. I found all you said very interesting. Thank you very much.
[In English] That ends the report of Henry Sochami. Taking about... taking about twelve minutes of Spool number 43.
We will leave the rest for another interviewee. Muchas gracias.
Chicago, November the 21st, 1950. This concludes Spool 9-43A of Henry Sochami, it is a spool in Spanish.
The next Spool 9-43B is by a Mr. Mizrahi and seems to be in English. Boder.